Modeling Epidemic Spread: A Gaussian Process Regression Approach  Baike She 1 ,   Lei Xin 2 ,   ,   Philip E. Par´ e 3 ,   Matthew Hale 1 , ∗  Abstract — Modeling epidemic spread is critical for informing policy decisions aimed at mitigation. Accordingly, in this work we   present   a   new   data-driven   method   based   on   Gaussian process regression (GPR) to model epidemic spread through the difference on the logarithmic scale of the infected cases. We   bound   the   variance   of   the   predictions   made   by   GPR, which quantifies the impact of epidemic data on the proposed model. Next, we derive a high-probability error bound on the prediction error in terms of the distance between the training points and a testing point, the posterior variance, and the level of change in the spreading process, and we assess how the characteristics of the epidemic spread and infection data influence   this   error   bound.   We   present   examples   that   use GPR to model and predict epidemic spread by using real- world infection data gathered in the UK during the COVID- 19   epidemic.   These   examples   illustrate   that,   under   typical conditions, the prediction for the next twenty days has   94 . 29 % of the noisy data located within the   95 % confidence interval, validating these predictions. We further compare the modeling and prediction results with other methods, such as polynomial regression,   k -nearest neighbors (KNN) regression, and neural networks, to demonstrate the benefits of leveraging GPR in disease spread modeling.  I. INTRODUCTION Modeling and predicting the spread of diseases is critical for understanding spreading patterns and decision-making for epidemic mitigation [1], [2]. Existing epidemic modeling and prediction techniques typically construct compartmental models by selecting model structures and parameters to fit spreading data [3], [4], e.g., in the susceptible-infected- recovered (SIR) model. Distinct from existing works, we leverage Gaussian process regression to model spreading trends by studying the number of infected cases directly, without using any particular compartmental model. Gaussian process regression excels at capturing complex, nonlinear relationships without relying on predefined func- tional forms and can effectively handle small datasets, which are common in measuring disease spreading [5], [6], [7]. For instance, [5] employs a spatio-temporal covariance function and data from various states and all weeks of the year to model influenza-like illness forecasting. Meanwhile, [7] trains individual Gaussian process (GP) models for each forecast based on a relatively small set of features from  *This work is supported by the grant NSF-ECCS #2238388 and by DARPA under grant HR00112220038. Corresponding Author.  1 Baike She and Matthew Hale are with the School of Electrical and Computer   Engineering,   Georgia   Institute   of   Technology,   Atlanta,   GA, 30318, USA.   bshe6@gatech.edu;   matthale@gatech.edu  2 Lei Xin is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The   Chinese   University   of   Hong   Kong,   Hong   Kong,   999077,   China.  leixin@cuhk.edu.hk  3 Philip E. Par´ e is with the Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.  philpare@purdue.edu  previous weeks, resulting in small, but reliable prediction in- tervals. Moreover, although existing works leverage Gaussian processes to model daily infected cases, they often overlook the fact that both the daily infected cases and the associated noise cannot follow a normal or log-normal distribution [8]. Therefore, applying Gaussian process regression directly to daily infected cases may not produce accurate results. In addition, these studies typically focus on empirical results of applying GPR to model and predict disease dynamics in time-series data, without delving into theoretical aspects. To address these challenges, we introduce an approach to modeling the change on the logarithmic scale of the number of infected cases using Gaussian process regression, while also providing insights into model uncertainty. We propose an upper bound on posterior variance to assess the impact of epidemic data and develop a high-probability error bound to examine how epidemic spread and infection data influence the accuracy of predictions and confidence in them. These results help bridge the gap between theoretical analyses and practical applications in epidemic modeling, paving the way for predictive control methods in future efforts. To illustrate this framework, we apply it to real COVID-19 infection data from the United Kingdom. These results show that by selecting appropriate parameters in the modeling process, predictions for twenty days into the future capture  94 . 29 % of the actual data from those days within a   95 % confidence interval, which validates the prediction accuracy in practice. As we show, most prediction errors arise from either drastic changes in the spreading trend or a limited number of available data samples, both of which increase uncertainty. We further use the same dataset to compare the modeling and prediction results with other methods, such as polynomial regression,   k -nearest neighbors (KNN) regression, and neural networks, to demonstrate the benefits of leveraging GPR for disease spread modeling. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II provides background and problem statements; Section III proposes the model, analyzes prediction uncertainty, and illustrates the results with examples; Section IV presents sensitivity analyses on the impact of the data preprocessing process on the modeling and prediction results. Section V concludes.  Notation:   We use   R   and   N   to denote the sets of reals and naturals, respectively. We define   n   =   { 1 ,   2 , . . . , n }   for   n   ∈  N > 0 . We use   | S |   to denote the cardinality of a finite set   S . A compact interval   T   is of the form   [ a, b ] , where   a, b   ∈   R ≥ 0  and   a < b . Its length is given by   ˆ T   =   b   −   a . For   v   ∈   R n , we use diag { v } ∈   R n × n   for the diagonal matrix whose   i th  diagonal entry is   v i ,   i   ∈   n . For a real symmetric matrix  A   ∈   R n × n , let   [ A ] ij   denote its   i th j th   entry and   λ max ( A )  arXiv:2312.09384v3 [stat.ML] 21 Nov 2024

denote its largest eigenvalue. We write   I n   ∈   R n × n   for the identity matrix. Let   N   ( μ, σ 2 )   denote the one-dimensional normal distribution with mean   μ   and variance   σ 2 . We use  exp( · )   and   log( · )   to denote the exponential function and the natural logarithmic function, respectively. We use   p ( · )   to represent the probability distribution of a random variable. II. B ACKGROUND AND   P ROBLEM   F ORMULATION  This section introduces Gaussian process regression and states the problems that we solve in the rest of the paper.  A. Gaussian process regression  We briefly introduce one-dimensional Gaussian process regression [9]. Consider an unknown function   f   :   R   →  R   and   n   inputs captured by   X   = [ x 1 , . . . , x n ] ⊤   ∈   R n , where   x i   ∈   R ,   i   ∈   n , and   n   ∈   N > 0 . The corresponding outputs are given by the vector   F   = [ f   ( x 1 ) , . . . , f   ( x n )] ⊤   ∈  R n , where the   n   outputs in   F   follow a joint Gaussian distribution.   The   mean   of   the   distribution   is   given   by  m ( X ) = [ m ( x 1 ) ,   · · ·   , m ( x n )] ⊤   ∈   R n . Suppose that the ob- servation   of   each   output   f   ( x i )   is   corrupted   with   zero- mean independent Gaussian noise, i.e.,   y ( x i ) =   f   ( x i ) +   ε i , where   ε i   ∼ N   (0 , σ 2  i   ) , and   σ 2  i   >   0   denotes the variance of   ε i . Then, the covariance matrix of the noise is   Σ   =  diag { σ 2 1   , . . . , σ 2  n } ∈   R n × n . Using the noisy training dataset  { ( x i , y ( x i )) } n i =1 , we can employ GPR to model the input- output relation   f   :   R   →   R   at a training location   x i , for   i   ∈   n , as well as to predict the output   f   ( x ∗ )   ∈   R   at some testing location   x ∗   ∈   R , where   x ∗   is not necessarily one of the   x i ’s. Gaussian process regression is a kernel-based approach. Hence,   we   use   k ( · ,   · )   :   R   ×   R   →   R ≥ 0   to   represent the potential kernel function [10]. Let   K ( X, X )   ∈   R n × n  ≥ 0  denote   the   kernel   matrix   of   the   training   points,   where  [ K ( X, X )] ij   =   k ( x i , x j   )   denotes the covariance between two training points   x i   and   x j   , for   i, j   ∈   n . For a testing point   x ∗ , we define   K ( x ∗ , X )   ∈   R 1 × n  ≥ 0   as the kernel vector such that   [ K ( x ∗ , X )] j   =   k ( x ∗ , x j   ) , for   j   ∈   n . Therefore,  K ( x ∗ , X )   captures the covariances between the testing point  x ∗   and all training points. As Gaussian process regression operates as a Bayesian inference approach, we consider a zero-mean prior for generality [9], though the results we develop can be generalized for any other prior. Consider the posterior distribution for the predicted ran- dom variable   f   ( x ∗ )   at the testing location   x ∗   conditioned on the noisy training data   { ( x i , y ( x i )) } n i =1 . The posterior mean  m ( x ∗ )   and posterior variance   σ 2 ( x ∗ )   at the testing location  x ∗   are given by the following result [9, Equation (2.22)].  Proposition 1.   Let   Y   = [ y ( x 1 ) ,   · · ·   , y ( x n )] ⊤ . Then we have  p ( f   ( x ∗ )   | { y ( x i ) } n i =1 ) =   N   ( m Y   ( x ∗ ) , σ 2  Y   ( x ∗ )) , where  m Y   ( x ∗ ) =   K ( x ∗ , X )( K ( X, X ) + Σ) − 1 Y, σ 2  Y   ( x ∗ ) =   k ( x ∗ , x ∗ )  −   K ( x ∗ , X )( K ( X, X ) + Σ) − 1 K ( x ∗ , X ) ⊤ .  B. Problem Formulation  As discussed in the introduction, critical metrics such as the number of infected cases are essential for assess- ing epidemic spread. However, both these cases and their associated   noise   do   not   follow   a   normal   or   log-normal distribution [8]. Furthermore, epidemic severity is typically monitored through population testing and data reporting, where observation noise is unavoidable. However, existing works often overlook these limitations and use Gaussian pro- cesses to model the spread by directly focusing on the trend of time-series infection cases. Additionally, missing cases frequently arise due to insufficient testing or underreporting. Therefore, in this work, we solve the following problems:  Problem   1.   Develop   a   new   model   that   uses   Gaussian process regression to model epidemic spread, and show the effectiveness of this approach analytically and numerically.  Problem 2.   Quantify how noise and data sample size affect the prediction results when using the model from Problem 1.  Problem 3.   Develop a high-probability error bound on the prediction error to analyze the impact of data, and validate this result on real-world data.  Problem   4.   Compare the GPR modeling and prediction results with other methods to demonstrate its benefits using real-world spread data.  III. G AUSSIAN PROCESS REGRESSION FOR   M ODELING AND   P REDICTING   E PIDEMIC   S PREAD  In Section III-A, we model epidemic spread using Gaus- sian process regression, and then quantify its accuracy in a lemma and an example. This solves Problem 1. In Sec- tion III-B, we establish an upper bound on the prediction variance to assess the impact of infection data, which solves Problem 2. Section III-C presents a high-probability error bound, explaining the relationship between the spreading dynamics, data, and prediction error, solving Problem 3. We compare GPR with other methods, through Examples 1 and 2, addressing Problem 4.  A. Modeling the Spread Using Gaussian Process Regression  We first solve Problem 1 by introducing a model to capture disease spreading trends. For an epidemic spreading process, we use   I ( t )   to denote a noisy observation of the number of the infected cases at time step   t   ≥   0 , i.e.,   I ( t )   equals the number of infected cases at time   t   plus some noise. We use  ¯ I ( t )   to denote the true infected cases without observation noise. Consider the datasets   { I ( t 1 ) , I ( t 2 ) , . . . , I ( t n ) }   and  { I ( t 1   − η ) , I ( t 2   − η ) , . . . , I ( t n   − η ) }   of an epidemic spreading process, measured at times   { t 1 , t 2 , . . . , t n }   and   { t 1   −   η, t 2   −  η, . . . , t n   −   η } , respectively, where   η >   0 ,   t   −   η >   0 , and  n   ∈   N > 0 . We assume that the change in the logarithmic scale of the number of infected cases between consecutive time steps approximates a Gaussian process. Thus, for   i   ∈   n ,

we define  ∆( t i ) = log(  ¯ I ( t i ))   −   log(  ¯ I ( t i   −   η ))  |   {z   }  ¯ ∆( t i )  + ε ( t i ) .   (1)  Remark 1.   We mentioned in Section II that infected cases typically do not follow a Gaussian or even a log-normal distribution. As discussed in [11], both the cases and the noise are often better modeled using Poisson or negative binomial distributions. The phenomenon where differences of log-transformed variables can approximate a Gaussian distribution is rooted in statistical principles such as vari- ance stabilization [12], the Central Limit Theorem, and the Delta Method [13]. While the log-transformation of Poisson- distributed data may introduce skewness, differencing tends to normalize highly-skewed distributions. This behavior is often leveraged in fields like epidemiology to model relative changes in data empirically, including changes in disease counts   [14],   [15],   [16].   For   example,   studies   like   [14] and [15] confirm that modeling the differences on the log- arithmic scale of case counts improves predictability and aligns with Gaussian-based inference methods. Widely-used tools (e.g., [16] for COVID-19 modeling) rely on relative changes in   case   counts,   often   log-differenced,   to ensure statistical validity under Gaussian assumptions. Therefore, we provide an analysis based on the first-order differences on the logarithmic scale of infected cases in   (1) .  Proposition 2.   Consider   ¯ ∆( t i ) = log(  ¯ I ( t i )) − log(  ¯ I ( t i   − η )) , and   ¯ I ( t )   >   0 , for all   ( t i   −   η )   ∈   R > 0 . If the number of infected cases increases during the time interval   [ t 1 , t 2 ] , then for any time   t i   such that   t i , t i   − η   ∈   [ t 1 , t 2 ] , we have   ¯ ∆( t i )   >  0 , and vice versa. If the number of infected cases remains unchanged, then   ¯ ∆( t i ) = 0 .  Remark   2.   The   proof   of   Proposition   2   is   in   the   Ap- pendix [17]. Proposition 2 is a direct result of the definition of   ¯ ∆( t i )   and the properties of the logarithmic function. Note that   ¯ ∆( t i ) = log(  ¯ I ( t i ) /   ¯ I ( t i   −   η ))   captures the ratio between the number of infected cases at time step   t i   and time step  t i   − η , for   η >   0 . We use the function   ¯ ∆ :   R ≥ 0   →   R   to model and analyze spreading trends. Similar to the reproduction number [18], which uses the threshold of one to determine whether infected cases are increasing or decreasing, we can use the threshold of zero for   ¯ ∆   to assess epidemic spread. If  ¯ ∆   is greater than zero, the spread is increasing; if it is less than zero, the spread is decreasing.  To simplify the analysis, we consider   I ( t )   >   0   for all  t   ≥   0 . In addition, we use i.i.d. noise   ε ( t i )   ∼ N   (0 , σ 2 )   to capture the noise term in (1). Thus, the covariance matrix of the noise terms is   Σ =   σ 2 I n . For an epidemic spreading pro- cess, we consider a set of   n   time steps   T   =   { t 1 , t 2 , . . . , t n }  as the input batch, for   n   ∈   N > 0 . The corresponding output batch of   n   entries is given by   { ∆( t 1 ) ,   ∆( t 2 ) , . . . ,   ∆( t n ) } . We define   ∆   = [∆( t 1 ) ,   ∆( t 2 ) , . . . ,   ∆( t n )] ⊤ , where   ∆( t i )   is defined in (1), for   t i   ∈   T   and   η >   0 . Our goal is to model and predict the first-order difference on the logarithmic scale of the infected cases. Hence, let the testing location be the time step   t ∗   ∈   T ,   T   = [ a, b ] . We can apply Proposition 1 to this model and the results are in Proposition 3.  Proposition   3.   Consider   an   unknown   function   ¯ ∆   :  R ≥ 0   →   R . The posterior mean at time   t ∗   is given by  m ∆ ( t ∗ ) =   K ( t ∗ , T   )( K ( T, T   ) +   σ 2 I n ) − 1 ∆ , and the pos- terior variance is   σ 2 ∆ ( t ∗ ) =   k ( t ∗ , t ∗ )   −   K ( t ∗ , T   )( K ( T, T   ) +  σ 2 I n ) − 1 K ( t ∗ , T   ) ⊤ , where   K ( T, T   )   is the kernel matrix between the training points,   k ( t ∗ , T   )   is the vector of co- variances   between   the   testing   point   t ∗   and   all   training points,   k ( t ∗ , t ∗ )   is the variance at the testing point, and   σ 2 I n  is the covariance matrix of the i.i.d noise.  For analysis, we specify the kernel function as the squared exponential kernel to capture the covariance between any pair of points   a, b   ∈   R ≥ 0 . The kernel itself is  k ( a, b ) =   α 2   exp    −   ( a   −   b ) 2  2 β 2    ,   (2) where   β >   0   is the length scale of the kernel, and   α 2   is the signal variance.  Remark 3.   While our results can extend to other stationary kernels that are Lipschitz continuous, we use the squared exponential kernel due to its effectiveness in modeling epi- demics [19]. The squared exponential kernel, commonly used in Gaussian process regression, depends on the distance between variables rather than their absolute positions, pro- moting smoothness and Lipschitz continuity in the modeled functions. These properties are essential for deriving error bounds [9], and we will use them below.  The Gaussian process model in Proposition 3 and the spread modeling approach in (1) together address Problem 1. We use the following example to illustrate the proposed Gaussian   process   model   for   modeling   epidemic   spread, which partially addresses Problem 4..  Example 1.   We use Gaussian process regression to model the real-world epidemic spread of COVID-19 in the United Kingdom, using infection data from March   1 st , 2022, to February   28 th , 2023 [20]. Figure 1 shows the daily number of infected cases per million people in the UK population during this period. This dataset is chosen due to its multiple waves of infection and the variability in data size over time. To better capture the changes in daily infected cases, we preprocess the data by applying a thirty-day rolling average. For example, the average number of cases on March   30 th , 2022, is calculated by averaging the cases from March   1 st  to March   30 th . By indexing March   30 th , 2022 as day one, we represent the daily infected cases on day   t   as   I ( t ) , with   t   ∈   335 . We set   η   =   7 . Then the difference on the logarithmic scale of consecutive daily observed infected cases is defined as   ∆( t ) = log( I ( t ))   −   log( I ( t   −   7)) ,   t   ≥   8 ,   t   ∈   335 . For example,   ∆(8)   on April   6 th , 2022, is calculated by subtracting the logarithmic scale of the infected cases on April   6 th   from the logarithmic scale of those of March   31 st . We plot   ∆( t ) , for   t   ≥   8   and   t   ∈   335 , from April   6 th , 2022

to February   28 th , 2023 in Figure 2 (dotted yellow line). Comparing Figure 2 to Figure 1, we see that   ∆( t )   effectively captures the trend in the spread. For instance, when   ∆( t )   is less than zero from April 2022 to May 2022, the trend in the number of infected cases decreases, as shown in Figure 1. This example demonstrates that when   ∆   is positive, daily infected cases are increasing, and when it is negative, they are decreasing. Next, we apply GPR to model the spread. The training time steps are   { 8 ,   9 , . . . ,   365 } , corresponding to the training data  { ∆(8) ,   ∆(9) , . . . ,   ∆(365) } , as depicted by the dotted yellow line in Figure 2. Using the GPR algorithm from Propo- sition 3, we visualize the posterior means at the training time steps in Figure 2. We use   ε   ∼ N   (0 ,   0 . 002)   to ensure that   98 . 18%   of the noisy training data points fall within the   95% -confidence interval. The red solid line in Figure 2 represents the posterior mean, denoted as   m ∗  ∆ ( t ) , at the training locations   t   ∈   365   and   t   ≥   8 , while the shaded red region shows the   95 %-confidence interval. We observe that  98 . 18%   of the training data are within the   95%   confidence intervals. We compute the mean square error (MSE) using the posterior mean and the training data, resulting in an MSE of   0 . 000069   for the Gaussian process regression model. The example shows how modeling the difference on the logarithmic scale of the infected cases effectively captures the spread dynamics and highlights the utility of Gaussian process regression in doing so. To validate the GPR model, we first leverage polynomial regression and   k -nearest neighbors (KNN) to model the same data, as these methods are commonly used as comparisons to disease spreading modeling methods [5]. We select the model parameters for polynomial regression and KNN to achieve relatively accurate models, based on the MSE and the percentage of training data that fall within the   95%  confidence intervals. For polynomial regression, we use a degree of   20 , resulting in an MSE of   0 . 000048 , with   93 . 64%  of the training data within the   95%   confidence intervals. The model generated by polynomial regression is represented by a dashed blue line, with the   95%   confidence interval captured by blue shaded areas. For the KNN model, we set  κ   = 15 , resulting in an MSE of   0 . 000080 , with   95 . 78%   of the training data within the   95%   confidence intervals. The model generated by KNN is represented by a dotted purple line, with the   95%   confidence interval captured by purple shaded areas. In addition, we leverage a neural network to model the same data. The data exhibits periodic patterns due to the fluctuations in the logarithmic scale of the infected cases. Given that standard neural networks, without proper feature augmentation, may struggle to efficiently learn such periodic behavior, we first apply sinusoidal feature generation. This technique augments the input data by incorporating sine transformations of the features [21]. We use a three-layer neural network (with   200   neurons in the input layer,   150  neurons in the hidden layer, and   100   neurons in the output layer). The MSE for the neural network is   0 . 000090 , with  93 . 33%   of the training data falling within the   95%   confi- dence intervals. The model generated by this neural network is represented by a dash-dotted green line, with the   95%  confidence interval captured by green shaded areas. All   four   modeling   approaches   can   generate   relatively accurate models, with MSEs within the same order of mag- nitude. Additionally, most of the training data fall within the  95%   confidence interval. However, compared to GPR, which requires selecting an appropriate kernel function, the other three methods require parameter tuning: the polynomial order for polynomial regression,   κ   for KNN, and the number of layers and neurons for neural networks. Moreover, while GPR allows flexibility in kernel selection, such as replacing the squared exponential kernel with periodic kernels when periodic patterns are observed [5], this is not strictly neces- sary in modeling. Without sinusoidal feature generation for the input data, the neural network model with the current configuration of layers and neurons would underfit, resulting in an MSE three orders of magnitude higher than the current results. Furthermore, although all three alternative models can capture the spread, their more complex structures may lead to overfitting, as will be discussed in Example 2. B. The Impact of Spread Data on Prediction Variance  We next propose an upper bound for the prediction vari- ance to study the impact of data on predictions.  Lemma 1.   Consider a set of time steps   T   =   { t 1 , t 2 , . . . , t n } . Let   T r   ( t ∗ )   represent   all   points   in   T   that   lie   within   a ball of radius   r , centered at the testing location   t ∗ , i.e.,  T r   ( t ∗ ) =   { t   ∈   T   :   | t   −   t ∗ | ≤   r } .   Consider the squared ex- ponential kernel from   (2)   for the Gaussian Process model in Proposition 3. The posterior variance   σ 2 ∆ ( t ∗ )   at the testing time step   t ∗   obeys the bound   σ 2 ∆ ( t ∗ )   ≤   α 2   −   α 2  α 2 +   σ 2  | T r   ( t ∗ ) |  .  The proof of Lemma 1 is provided in the Appendix [17]. Lemma 1 provides a data-dependent posterior variance bound on   σ 2 ∆ ( t ∗ )   at the testing time step   t ∗   in terms of the number of the training data points around the testing location. The bound on the prediction variance given by Lemma 1 shows that more training data in   T r   ( t ∗ ) , captured by   | T r   ( t ∗ ) | , leads to a lower variance bound. Additionally, higher variance noise in the data, captured by   σ 2 , increases the bound on the posterior variance. In the absence of observation noise or with infinitely many data points near   t ∗ , the variance bound approaches zero. Lemma 1 illustrates how the available data, the spreading trend, and noise can affect the posterior variance bound, and it solves Problem 2.  C. High Probability Error Bound on the Prediction  Having discussed the impact of data on the upper bound of the posterior variance, we now analyze the error bound on the prediction error. We first introduce the Lipschitz constant of the squared exponential kernel [22]. We consider the space of sample functions corresponding to the space of continuous functions on the time interval   T   ⊂   [ t a , t b ] , where   t a , t b   ∈  R > 0 , such that the input batch   T   ⊂   T .

Fig. 1.   The daily infected cases in the United Kingdom from   03   −   01   −   2022   to   02   −   28   −   2023   [20].  Fig. 2.   Gaussian process regression model for   ∆( t ) .  Lemma 2.   [22, Corollary 8] Consider   t i , t j   ∈   T . Then for all   t ,   k ( · , t )   is   L k -Lipschitz, where   L k   =   α 2  βe 1 / 2   .  We see that   L k   is determined by the kernel parameters   α  and   β   in (2). In addition, consider our continuous unknown function   ¯ ∆   from Remark 2, where   ¯ ∆ :   T ≥ 0   →   R   with Lips- chitz constant   L   ¯ ∆ , such that   |   ¯ ∆( t 1 )   −   ¯ ∆( t 2 ) | ≤   L   ¯ ∆   | t 1   −   t 2 |  for all   t 1 , t 2   ∈   T . The Lipschitz continuity of   ¯ ∆( t )   indicates that the change in spread over some time interval is limited by the length of that interval. Recall the training dataset   { ( t i ,   ∆( t i )) } n i =1   where   t i   ∈   T   . We consider the training dataset to be within a specific time interval of interest, i.e.,   T   ⊂   T , and the testing point is also in this interval, i.e.,   t ∗   ∈   T . The time interval of interest may be extensive, causing the testing location   t ∗   to be far from any of the training points in the dataset   T   . To address this issue when studying the posterior mean, we consider a set of grid points   M   that are evenly distributed on  R ≥ 0 . We define the radius associated with the point   t ′   ∈   M  as   τ   , such that   T τ   ( t ′ ) := [ t ′   −   τ, t ′   +   τ   ]   for all   t ′   ∈   M . Then we consider   T   ⊂   T   ⊆ { t   |   t   ∈   S  t ′ ∈ M  [ t ′   −   τ, t ′   +   τ   ] } . To ensure that the union of the intervals of length   2 τ   can cover the continuous-time interval   T , the length of the interval between any two neighboring points in   M   must be smaller than   2 τ   . We define the covering number of   T , denoted by   M   ( τ,   T ) , as the cardinality of the set   M   with the minimum number of grid points to satisfy   T   ⊆ { t   |   t   ∈   S  t ′ ∈ M  [ t ′   −   τ, t ′   +   τ   ] } . Figure 3 illustrates a time interval   T   with   M   ( τ,   T ) = 7 . We derive the following theorem in part by using results from [23]. This result is gives a high-probability bound on prediction accuracy, and it solves Problem 3.  Theorem 1.   Consider a zero-mean Gaussian process defined through the kernel   k ( · ,   · )   in   (2)   with Lipschitz constant   L k  on time interval   T . Consider a continuous unknown function  ¯ ∆ :   T ≥ 0   →   R   that that captures the spreading process through the difference on the logarithmic scale of the infected cases, with Lipschitz constant   L   ¯ ∆ . The posterior mean of a   Gaussian   process   conditioned   on   the   training   dataset  { ( t i ,   ∆( t i )) } n i =1 , for all   t i   ∈   T   , at the testing time step   t ∗   is given by   m ∆ ( t ∗ ) . Consider a set of grid points   M . If, for all  t ∗   ∈   T , there exists   t i   ∈   T   and   t ′   ∈   M   such that   t i   ∈   T τ   ( t ′ )

Fig. 3.   A time interval   T   with   M   ( τ,   T ) = 7 .  and   | t ∗   −   t i | ≤   τ   , then  P     ¯ ∆( t ∗ )   −   m ∆ ( t ∗ )   ≤   p γ δ   ( τ   ) σ ∆ ( t ∗ ) +   ξ δ   ( τ   )    ≥   1   −   δ,  for all   δ   ∈   (0 ,   1) . Note that   ¯ ∆( t ∗ )   is the noise-free variable at the testing time step   t ∗ , and   m ∆ ( t ∗ )   and   σ ∆ ( t ∗ )   are the posterior mean and posterior standard deviation from Proposition 3, respectively. Further, we have  γ δ   ( τ   ) = 2 log   ˆ T  2 τ δ   +  1  δ  !  (3)  ξ δ   ( τ   ) = ( L   ¯ ∆   +   L m ) τ   +   p γ δ   ( τ   ) L σ 2   τ ,   (4)  where   L   ¯ ∆   is   the   Lipschitz   constant   of   the   function   ¯ ∆ ,  L m   =   α 2  βe 1 / 2  √ n ∥ ( K ( T, T   ) +   σ 2 I n ) − 1 ∆ ∥   is the Lipschitz constant of the posterior mean function   m ∆ , and   L σ 2   =  2 nα 4  βe 1 / 2   ( K ( T, T   ) +   σ 2 I n ) − 1   is the Lipschitz constant of the posterior variance function   σ 2 ∆ .  The proof of Theorem 1 is provided in the Appendix [17]. This theorem gives a high-probability error bound on the prediction error, which depends on the distance between training and testing points, captured by the length of the time interval   ˆ T . A larger   ˆ T   results in a larger error bound, and vice versa. The bound also shows that higher posterior variance at the testing time step   σ ∆ ( t ∗ )   increases the error bound. Additionally, a lower Lipschitz constant of the spreading function   L   ¯ ∆( t )   reduces the error bound, as smaller changes in the spreading process correspond to a lower Lipschitz constant. While Proposition 3 provides an analytical solution for the posterior mean and variance of the GPR model, the bounds from Lemma 1 and Theorem 1 offer valuable insights for selecting datasets and data collection methods, helping to improve modeling outcomes.  Example 2.   Consider the dataset representing the difference on the logarithmic scale of the infected cases in the UK, shown by the solid red line in Figure 2. As in Example 1, the dataset is preprocessed using a thirty-day rolling average, with   η   set to 7. Then, we use a moving window of   30   days of data to train the GPR model and predict the posterior mean for the subsequent   20   days. For example, data from April  6 th   to May   6 th , 2022, is used to predict from May   7 th   to May   27 th , 2022. In Figure 4, the solid red line represents the posterior mean of the predictions, with the shaded red area showing the   95%   confidence interval. The dotted yellow line represents the noisy data. Around   94 . 29%   of noisy data are located within the   95%   confidence interval. Most predictions that fail to include the data within the 95% confidence interval arise from either abrupt changes in the spreading trend and/or the limited number of available data samples. This figure illustrates that the prediction captures the trend of the spread when compared to the noisy observations. Note that the confidence interval represents the uncertainty in predicting the true value, which is not directly available. We further compare the GPR prediction results with the modeling methods considered in Example 1, including poly- nomial regression, KNN, and neural networks. First, we use polynomial regression of degree three, resulting in an MSE of   0 . 0183 , with   72 . 00%   of the testing data falling within the   95 . 00%   confidence intervals. The predictions generated by polynomial regression are represented by a dashed blue line, with the   95%   confidence interval captured by blue shaded areas. For the KNN model, we set   κ   = 3 , which yields an MSE of   0 . 0046 , with   51 . 00%   of the testing data falling within the   95%   confidence intervals. The KNN model predictions are represented by a dotted purple line, with the  95%   confidence interval captured by purple shaded areas. In addition, we leverage a standard neural network to predict the same spread, where sinusoidal feature generation is not applied to the input, as we only use thirty data points to train the model for each time period. The neural network consists of three layers: an input layer with   50   neurons, a hidden layer with   25   neurons, and an output layer with   10  neurons. The MSE for predictions generated by the neural network is   0 . 0070 , with   43 . 67%   of the testing data falling within the   95%   confidence intervals. The model generated by this neural network is represented by a dash-dotted green line, with the   95%   confidence interval captured by green shaded areas. We further discuss why different models are used for prediction compared to the modeling process in Example 1 for polynomial regression, KNN, and neural networks. In the modeling process, capturing the periodic pattern of the spread over an entire year requires higher orders for both polynomial regression and KNN. However, using higher or- ders for these models can lead to overfitting in the prediction task. Specifically, when leveraging only thirty days of data

to predict the spread over the next twenty days, setting the polynomial and KNN orders to   20   and   15 , respectively, results in severe overfitting and high MSE. Consequently, we   adjust   the   orders   for   both   models   to   improve   their performance in the prediction task. For prediction using neural networks, instead of employing the same model with three layers of neurons (an input layer with   200   neurons, a hidden layer with   150   neurons, and an output layer with  100   neurons) and sine transformations of the training data features, we use a standard neural network with three layers of neurons (containing   50 ,   25 , and   10   neurons in the input, hidden, and output layers, respectively). We avoid feature augmentation and reduce the number of neurons in each layer to prevent overfitting, given the significantly smaller amount of data and the absence of periodic patterns within each training and prediction period. Even after adjusting the parameters for polynomial regres- sion, KNN, and neural networks, resulting in MSEs of the same order of magnitude as the GPR, the proportion of pre- dictions within the   95%   confidence interval is significantly lower than that of the GPR predictions. More importantly, the same GPR modeling approach used in Example 1 can effec- tively capture the periodic patterns in the spread. In contrast, the other three methods require parameter adjustments to balance modeling and prediction performance, making them less robust for capturing such complex dynamics. In   addition   to   comparing   to   other   prediction   models, Figure 5 illustrates the difference between the posterior mean and the noisy observations at each prediction, shown by the solid red line. The upper bound, computed based on Theorem 1, is plotted in blue. We assume that   M   ( T , τ   ) = 5 , where   τ   = 5   and   ˆ T   = 50 . We assume that the Lipschitz constant of the function   ∆   is   L   ¯ ∆   = 0 . 01   and   δ   = 0 . 05 . We observe that, during each twenty-day prediction period, the bound increases monotonically as the prediction time steps move further away from the training data. By comparing the bound from April 2022 to September 2022 with the bound from September 2022 to March 2023, we find that the bound is looser during periods of significant changes in the spread (April 2022 to September 2022), leading to a more conservative bound. Conversely, when the spread is more consistent (September 2022 to March 2023), the bound tightens. The bound is generally larger when considering a longer time interval into the future. However, the properties of the bound can guide us in selecting appropriate datasets and data collection methods to improve prediction results.  IV. S ENSITIVITY   A NALYSIS  This section serves as supporting information for perform- ing a sensitivity analysis to highlight the potential impact of data preprocessing on the empirical results. We include two discussions of the sensitivity analysis, regarding the GPR modeling in Example 1 and GPR prediction in Example 2. Detailed information can be found at the link:   https:// github.com/baikeshe/GPR_Epi_Modeling.git .  A. Sensitivity Analysis on GPR Modeling  Instead of leveraging a fixed window of   30 , we conduct a sensitivity analysis using different lengths for the averaging window in GPR modeling. First, we perform sensitivity analyses for data preprocessing in modeling the spread using GPR for the simulation in Example 1. In addition to using a   30 -day smoothing window and a   7 -day difference on the logarithmic scale of infected cases, we conduct two types of sensitivity analysis for the modeling. In the first scenario, we fix the   7 -day difference on the logarithmic scale and varied the   30 -day smoothing window to   1 ,   3 ,   5 ,   10 ,   20 ,  30 , and   50   days, using the same GPR method to model the   data.   The   results   are   illustrated   in   Figure   6,   where shorter smoothing windows capture short-term perturbations, while longer smoothing windows reveal more pronounced periodic patterns. Despite these differences, all GPR models retain at least   92 . 48%   of the training data within the   95%  confidence intervals. In the second scenario, we fix the   30 - day smoothing window and vary the   7 -day difference to   1 ,   3 ,  7 ,   14 ,   21 , and   28   days, comparing the modeling results using the same GPR approach. The results are shown in Figure 7, where   higher   values   of   η   result   in   narrower   prediction confidence intervals because larger   η   better captures longer- term spreading trends, thereby reducing noise over shorter time periods.  B. Sensitivity Analysis on GPR Prediction  After discussing the impact of the data preprocessing on GPR modeling, we perform sensitivity analyses for data preprocessing in predicting the spread using GPR for the sim- ulation in Example 2. Instead of leveraging a fixed window of   30 , we first conduct a sensitivity analysis by varying the averaging window lengths for data-preprocessing for GPR training and prediction. The smoothing window for data preprocessing is draw from the set   { 1 ,   3 ,   5 ,   10 ,   20 ,   30 ,   50 } , where we fixed   η   = 7 . The GPR prediction results are given in Figure 8. Figure 8 shows that when the window sizes are   1 ,  3 , and   5 , the prediction accuracies are   80 . 94% ,   83 . 12% , and  86 . 25% , with corresponding MSE values of   0 . 0100 ,   0 . 0087 , and   0 . 0064 , respectively. We also experiment with smoothing window sizes of   10 ,   20 ,   30 , and   50 . The prediction accuracies for these windows are   79 . 67% ,   74 . 67% ,   94 . 29% , and   73 . 46%  with corresponding MSE values of   0 . 0031 ,   0 . 0028 ,   0 . 0011  and   0 . 0009 , respectively. According to the simulations in Figure 8, we provide the following summary of the prediction results.  •   Short   Smoothing   Windows   ( 1 ,   3 ,   5   days):   Shorter smoothing windows retain much of the data’s short- term variability. This allows the GPR model to capture and adapt to rapid changes or fluctuations in the time- series data, leading to improved short-term predictions. However, if the window is too short, the model may overfit to noise rather than the true underlying trend, limiting its ability to generalize to unseen data. This is why even smaller windows (like   1   day) may still result in suboptimal prediction.

Fig. 4.   Posterior mean of the prediction on spreading trend. Since we lack additional information when modeling the spread, such as periodic spreading patterns, we observe lower prediction accuracy when   ∆   shifts from increasing to decreasing, or vice versa.  Fig. 5.   Probability upper bound with   δ   = 0 . 05 . The upper bound changes depending on how far into the future the prediction length extends. For the same twenty-day period, the further into the future, the larger the prediction error bound will be.  •   Moderate Smoothing Windows ( 10 ,   20   days): These window sizes may filter out too much short-term vari- ability while still not fully capturing the longer-term periodic patterns. The model can struggle to find a balance, missing some important details necessary for accurate predictions. The smoothed data using these window sizes might show incomplete or mixed trends, which can confuse the GPR, resulting in less reliable predictions and result in lower prediction accuracy.  •   Optimal   Smoothing   Window   ( 30   days):   A   30-day smoothing window provides the right balance between filtering out short-term noise and capturing long-term patterns, including periodic trends in disease spread. This leads to more stable and accurate predictions. With a 30-day window, the underlying periodic behavior (such   as   monthly   trends   in   the   spread   of   disease) becomes clearer. This helps the GPR model learn and extrapolate these patterns effectively, enhancing predic- tion accuracy.  •   Long Smoothing Windows ( 50   days): A longer smooth- ing window excessively suppresses short-term varia- tions, overemphasizing long-term trends. This reduces the model’s flexibility and sensitivity to recent changes in   the   data,   causing   poorer   predictions,   particularly when abrupt changes occur. Therefore, using a   30 -day moving average for data prepro- cessing provides an optimal balance. It effectively captures relevant periodic trends while filtering out short-term noise. Shorter   windows   ( 1 ,   3 ,   5   days)   may   improve   predictions by retaining more detail but risk overfitting to noise. In contrast, moderate windows ( 10 ,   20   days) fail to capture both short-term and long-term dynamics effectively, while overly long windows ( 50   days) oversmooth the data, limiting the model’s adaptability. In addition, we provide GPR prediction

Fig. 6.   GPR model with   1 -,   3 -,   5 -,   10 -,   20 -,   30 -, and   50 -day smoothing window and   η   = 7 . Shorter smoothing windows capture short-term perturbations, while longer smoothing windows reveal more pronounced periodic patterns. Despite these differences, all GPR models retain at least   92 . 48%   of the training data within the   95%   confidence intervals.  Fig. 7.   GPR model with   30 -day smoothing window and   η   is selected from   { 1 ,   3 ,   7 ,   14 ,   21 ,   28 } . Higher values of   η   result in narrower prediction confidence intervals because larger   η   better captures longer-term spreading trends, thereby reducing noise over shorter time periods.

Fig. 8.   GPR Prediction with   1 -,   3 -,   5 -,   10 -,   20 -,   30 -, and   50 -day smoothing window and   η   = 7 . A   30 -day moving average of the data provides an optimal balance for data preprocessing, capturing periodic trends while filtering short-term noise. Shorter windows ( 1 ,   3 ,   5   days) retain detail but risk overfitting, while moderate windows ( 10 ,   20   days) struggle to capture both short- and long-term dynamics. Overly long windows ( 50   days) oversmooth the data, reducing model adaptability.  Fig. 9.   GPR Prediction with   30 -day smoothing window and   η   is selected from   { 1 ,   3 ,   7 ,   14 ,   21 ,   28 } . GPR Prediction with a fixed   30 -day smoothing window while varying the length of the log-difference on infected cases, where   η   was selected from the set   { 1 ,   3 ,   7 ,   14 ,   21 ,   28 } .  results with a fixed   30 -day smoothing window while varying the length of the log-difference on infected cases, with   η  selected from the set   3 ,   7 ,   14 ,   21 ,   28 . Figure 9 also shows that by selecting an appropriate   η , we can balance prediction accuracy and the spreading patterns observed in the data. V. C ONCLUSION  In this work, we propose an approach to modeling epi- demic spreading processes by using Gaussian process re- gression. We model and predict   the spread   through the difference on the logarithmic scale of the infected cases. We provide an upper bound on the posterior variance and mean error, highlighting the impact of the spreading trend and available data. Additionally, we discuss the impact of data preprocessing on modeling and prediction performance. We further highlight the benefits of using GPR methods by empirically comparing them with other modeling and pre- diction approaches, including polynomial regression, KNN, and neural networks. In future work, we plan to utilize this model and prediction mechanism to design a new data-driven predictive control strategy for epidemic mitigation. R EFERENCES [1]   G. Giordano, F. Blanchini, R. Bruno, P. Colaneri, A. Di Filippo, A. Di Matteo, and M. Colaneri, “Modelling the COVID-19 epidemic and implementation of population-wide interventions in Italy,”   Nature Medicine , vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 855–860, 2020.

[2]   M. Woolhouse, “How to make predictions about future infectious disease risks,”   Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences , vol. 366, no. 1573, pp. 2045–2054, 2011. [3]   B.   She,   S.   Sundaram,   and   P.   E.   Par´ e,   “A   learning-based   model predictive control framework for real-time SIR epidemic mitigation,” in   Proc. of the American Contr. Conf. , 2022, pp. 2565 –2570. [4]   B. She, S. Sundaram, and P. E. Par´ e, “Optimal mitigation of SIR epidemics under model uncertainty,” in   Proc. of the 2022 IEEE Conf. on Deci. and Con. (CDC) .   IEEE, 2022, pp. 4333–4338. [5]   R. Senanayake, S. O’Callaghan, and F. Ramos, “Predicting spatio- temporal propagation of seasonal influenza using variational Gaussian process regression,” in   Proc. of the AAAI Conf. on Arti. Intel. , vol. 30, 2016. [6]   R. M. A. Vel´ asquez and J. V. M. Lara, “Forecast and evaluation of COVID-19 spreading in USA with reduced-space Gaussian process regression,”   Chaos, Solitons & Fractals , vol. 136, p. 109924, 2020. [7]   C. Zimmer and R. Yaesoubi, “Influenza forecasting framework based on Gaussian Processes,” in   Int. Conf. on Mach. Lea.   PMLR, 2020, pp. 11 671–11 679. [8]   L. Gonc ¸alves, M. A. A. Turkman, C. Geraldes, T. A. Marques, and L. Sousa, “COVID-19: Nothing is normal in this pandemic,”   Journal of Epidemiology and Global Health , vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 146–149, 2021. [9]   C. K. Williams and C. E. Rasmussen,   Gaussian Processes For Machine Learning .   MIT press Cambridge, MA, 2006, vol. 2, no. 3. [10]   M. G. Genton, “Classes of kernels for machine learning: A statistics perspective,”   J. of Mach. Lear. Res. , vol. 2, no. Dec, pp. 299–312, 2001. [11]   S. Bhatt, N. Ferguson, S. Flaxman, A. Gandy, S. Mishra, and J. A. Scott,   “Semi-mechanistic   Bayesian   modelling   of   COVID-19   with renewal processes,”   J. of the Roy. Stat. Soci. Ser. A: Stat. in Soci. , vol. 186, no. 4, pp. 601–615, 2023. [12]   J. Shao,   Mathematical Statistics .   Springer Science & Business Media, 2008. [13]   G. W. Oehlert, “A note on the delta method,”   The American Statisti- cian , vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 27–29, 1992. [14]   J. M. Bland and D. G. Altman, “Statistics notes: The use of trans- formation when comparing two means,”   BMJ , vol. 312, no. 7039, p. 1153, 1996. [15]   N. I. Bosse, S. Abbott, A. Cori, E. van Leeuwen, J. Bracher, and S. Funk, “Scoring epidemiological forecasts on transformed scales,”  PLoS Comp. Bio. , vol. 19, no. 8, p. e1011393, 2023. [16]   Sam Abbott, Joel Hellewell, Katharine Sherratt, Katelyn Gostic, Joe Hickson, Hamada S. Badr, Michael DeWitt, Robin Thompson, Epi- Forecasts, and Sebastian Funk,   EpiNow2: Estimate Real-Time Case Counts and Time-Varying Epidemiological Parameters , 2020. [17]   B. She, L. Xin, P. E. Par´ e, and M. Hale, “Modeling and Predicting Epidemic Spread: A Gaussian Process Regression Approach,”   arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09384 , 2023. [18]   P. van den Driessche, “Reproduction numbers of infectious disease models,”   Inf. Dis. Mod. , vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 288–303, 2017. [19]   S. Abbott, J. Hellewell, R. N. Thompson, K. Sherratt, H. P. Gibbs, N. I. Bosse, J. D. Munday, S. Meakin, E. L. Doughty, J. Y. Chun,  et al. , “Estimating the time-varying reproduction number of SARS- CoV-2 using national and subnational case counts,”   Wellcome Open Research , vol. 5, no. 112, p. 112, 2020. [20]   E. Mathieu, H. Ritchie, L. Rod´ es-Guirao, C. Appel, C. Giattino, J. Hasell, B. Macdonald, S. Dattani, D. Beltekian, E. Ortiz-Ospina, and M. Roser, “Coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19),”   Our World in Data , 2020, https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus. [21]   J. C. Wong, C. C. Ooi, A. Gupta, and Y.-S. Ong, “Learning in sinu- soidal spaces with physics-informed neural networks,”   IEEE Trans. on Arti. Intel. , vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 985–1000, 2022. [22]   A. Lederer, J. Umlauft, and S. Hirche, “Uniform error and posterior variance bounds for Gaussian process regression with application to safe control,”   arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.05328 , 2021. [23]   ——, “Uniform error bounds for Gaussian process regression with application to safe control,”   Proc. NeurIPS , vol. 32, 2019. [24]   N.   Srinivas,   A.   Krause,   S.   M.   Kakade,   and   M.   W.   Seeger, “Information-theoretic regret bounds for Gaussian process optimiza- tion in the bandit setting,”   IEEE Trans. on Inf. Theo. , vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 3250–3265, 2012.  A PPENDIX  A. Proof of Proposition 2  If the number of infected cases is increasing in the time interval   [ t 1 , t 2 ] ,   and   t i , t i   −   η   ∈   [ t 1 , t 2 ] ,   we   have   that  ¯ I ( t i ) ¯ I ( t i − η )   >   1 , where   I ( t )   >   0   for all   t   ∈   [ t 1 , t 2 ] . According to (1),   ¯ ∆( t i ) = log(  ¯ I ( t i ) /   ¯ I ( t i   −   η ))   ≥   log(1) = 0 , where we use   log(1) = 0   and that the natural logarithm function is monotonically increasing. We can apply the same approach to demonstrate scenarios where the number of infected cases is either decreasing or remains constant over the interval  [ t 1 , t 2 ] .  B. Proof of Lemma 1  We first introduce an established result. We consider a Gaussian process model with an isotropic kernel   k ( · ,   · ) , which decreases as the distance between its arguments de- creases. We also have an input training dataset   X   with zero- mean observation noise and a specified variance   σ 2 . Let  B r   ( x ∗ ) =   { x   ∈   X   :   ∥ x   −   x ∗ ∥ ≤   r }   denote the training dataset restricted to a ball centered at the testing location  x ∗ , where   x, x ∗   ∈   R n . We have that the radius of the ball   r   ≤   k ( x ∗ ,x ∗ )  L k   , where   L k   is the Lipschitz constant of the kernel function   k ( · ,   · )   in its first argument. According to [22, Corollary 2], the posterior variance of the prediction is bounded by   σ 2 ( x ∗ )   ≤   k (0 ,   0)   −   k 2 ( r,r )  k (0 , 0)+   σ 2  | B r   ( x ) |  .  Now consider the input batch   T   =   { t 1 , t 2 , . . . , t n }   and the output batch   { ∆( t 1 ) ,   ∆( t 2 ) , . . . ,   ∆( t n ) } . Under the con- dition that   T r   ( t ∗ ) =   { t   ∈   T   :   | t   −   t ∗ | ≤   r }   contains all time steps in   T   that are within distance   r   of the testing location  t ∗ , we have that   σ 2 ∆ ( t ∗ )   ≤   α 2   −   α 4  α 2 +   σ 2  | T r   ( t ∗ ) |  .  C. Proof of Theorem 1  We first derive the Lipschitz constant bounds of the pos- terior mean function   m ∆   and the posterior variance function  σ 2 ∆ . Consider the two predictions   m ∆ ( t ∗ )   and   m ∆ ( t + )   at two testing time steps   t ∗ , t +   ∈   T . Based on Proportion 3, we have that the absolute difference between the posterior means evaluated at   t ∗   and   t +   is given by  m ∆ ( t ∗ )   −   m ∆ ( t + )  =   ∥ ( K ( t ∗ , T   )   −   K ( t + , T   )) ( K ( T, T   ) +   σ 2 I n ) − 1 ∆  |   {z   }  Ψ  ∥ ≤   L k  √ n ∥ Ψ ∥   t ∗   −   t +   =   α 2  βe 1 / 2  √ n ∥ Ψ ∥   t ∗   −   t +   ,   (5) where we use the result from Lemma 2 that the squared ex- ponential kernel is Lipschitz continuous in its first argument with constant   L k   =   α 2  βe 1 / 2   . Thus, the posterior mean function  m ∆   at testing locations   t ∗ , t +   ∈   T   is Lipschitz continuous with the Lipschitz constant   L m   =   α 2  βe 1 / 2  √ n ∥ Ψ ∥ . Next,   we   derive   the   bound   on   the   prediction   vari- ance function   σ 2 ∆ . Applying the Cauchy-Schwarz inequal- ity   to   the   absolute   value   of   the   difference   of   poste- rior   variances   at   the   testing   time   steps   t ∗   and   t + ,   we have that   σ 2 ∆ ( t ∗ )   −   σ 2 ∆ ( t + )   ≤ ∥ K ( t ∗ , T   )   −   K ( t + , T   ) ∥ ×  ( K ( T, T   ) +   σ 2 I n ) − 1   × ∥ K ( t ∗ , T   ) +   K ( t + , T   ) ∥ , where

we   use   the   fact   that   k ( t ∗ , t ∗ )   −   k ( t + , t + )   =   0 . Again   using   Lemma   2   gives   ∥ K ( t ∗ , T   )   −   K ( t + , T   ) ∥   ≤ √ n   α 2  βe 1 / 2   | t ∗   −   t + | .   In   addition,   by   the   definition   of   the squared exponential kernel, we have  K ( t ∗ , T   ) +   K ( t + , T   )   ≤   2 √ n   max  t ∗ ,t + ∈ T  k ( t ∗ , t + )   (6)  = 2 √ nα 2   exp    −  min  t ∗ ,t + ∈ T  ( t ∗   −   t + ) 2  2 β 2      = 2 √ nα 2 .   (7) Hence, the Lipschitz constant   L σ 2   of the posterior variance function   σ 2 ∆   is given by  σ 2 ∆ ( t ∗ )   −   σ 2 ∆ ( t + )  ≤   2 nα 4  βe 1 / 2   ( K ( T, T   ) +   σ 2 I n ) − 1  |   {z   }  L σ 2  t ∗   −   t +   .   (8) Then, we transfer the Lipschitz continuity of the posterior variance to the posterior standard deviation through the equa- tion   | σ ∆ ( t ∗ )   −   σ ∆ ( t + ) | ≤   p | σ 2 ∆ ( t ∗ )   −   σ 2 ∆ ( t + ) | , due to the fact that standard deviations are nonnegative. Therefore, we can bound the difference of the posterior standard deviation at two testing time steps through  σ ∆ ( t + )   −   σ ∆ ( t ∗ )   ≤   p L σ 2  p | t +   −   t ∗ | .   (9) Based on (5)-(9), we show the high probability error bound of the posterior mean. Recall that we define the time interval of interest   T   such that the training time steps   T   ⊂   T   and the testing time steps   t ∗ , t +   ∈   T . Further, the time interval   T   is covered by   M   ( τ, T   )   intervals of the form   T τ   ( t ′ )   for all   t ′   ∈  M . We prove the high probability error bound by exploiting the fact that if there exists   t ′   ∈   M   such that   t +   ∈   T τ   ( t ′ ) , and  max  t ∗ ∈ T   min  t + ∈ T τ   ( t ′ )  | t ∗   −   t + | ≤   τ   , then it holds with a probability of at least   1   −   M   ( τ,   T ) e − γ ( τ   ) / 2   that  ¯ ∆( t ∗ )   −   m ∆ ( t ∗ )   ≤   p γ ( τ   ) σ ∆ ( t ∗ ) ,   (10) for all   t ∗   ∈   T τ   ( t ′ )   [24, Equations (25) and (26)]. By choosing   γ ( τ   ) = 2 log     M   ( τ, T )  δ    , we have that  ¯ ∆( t ∗ )   −   m ∆ ( t ∗ )   ≤  r  2 log(   M   ( τ,   T )  δ   ) σ ∆ ( t ∗ ) ,  for all   t ∗   ∈   T τ   ( t ′ )   holds with a probability of at least   1   −   δ  for   δ   ∈   (0 ,   1) . Due to the continuity of the functions   ¯ ∆ ,   m ∆   and   σ 2 ∆ , we have that   min  t + ∈ T τ   ( t ′ )  ¯ ∆( t ∗ )   −   ¯ ∆( t + )   ≤   τ L   ¯ ∆ , for all  t ∗   ∈   T , where   L   ¯ ∆   is the Lipschitz constant of the function  ¯ ∆ . Based on (5), the prediction means between two time steps   t +   and   t ∗   satisfy   min  t + ∈ T τ   ( t ′ )  | m ( t ∗ )   −   m ∆ ( t + ) | ≤   τ L m , for all   t ∗   ∈   T , where   L m   is the Lipschitz constant of the posterior mean function   m ∆ . In addition, according to (9), the predicted standard deviation at two testing locations is given by   min  t + ∈ T τ   ( t ′ )  | σ ∆ ( t + )   −   σ ∆ ( t ∗ ) | ≤  √ L σ 2   τ   , for all  t ∗   ∈   T . Based on these conditions and [23, Equations (27)- (33)], we obtain that  p     ¯ ∆( t ∗ )   −   m ∆ ( t ∗ )   ≤   p γ ( τ   ) σ ∆ ( t ∗ ) +   ξ ( τ   )    ≥   1   −   δ,  (11) for all   t ∗   ∈   T , where   γ ( τ   ) = 2 log     M   ( τ, T )  δ    , and   ξ ( τ   ) = ( L   ¯ ∆   +   L m ) τ   +   p γ ( τ   ) L σ 2   τ   , where   M   ( τ,   T )   is the covering number of the interval   T   given the collection of points   M . Recall that we use   ˆ T   to represent the length of the interval  T . By the definition of the covering number of an interval, we have that   M   ( τ,   T ) =   ˆ T  2 τ   +1 . Hence, we have that   γ ( τ   ) = 2 log     ˆ T  2 τ   +1  δ    , which completes the proof.